This is 'the Technical Difficulties' and we play 'Citation Needed'.
With me today, he reads books you know, this is Chris Joel.
[muttering] There is something between my teeth ...
Everyone's favorite Gary Brannan, Gary Brannan.
Enter a power cable here.
True?
Oh, you know ...
You really went for it ... I did not think you would finish it.
I did not know you really went into it.
Urgh!
And the most bouncing man on the internet, Matt Gray.
Bienvenue (Welcome), YouTube!
For me I have an article from Wikipedia and these gentlemen can not see it.
For every fact they have, they get a point and a bell. [thing]
And there is a special prize for particularly good answers, and that is ... [Mystery biscuits]
Today we are going to talk about 'Project Cybersyn'.
Oh! Oh…! Oh ... There are many cyber sins (sin = sin in English).
Is it a campaign by the Church of England to cleanse robots of their sins?
No, and it is spelled as SY N.
Oh come on! This is a book or something ...
No, this is really true. But I admit; it sounds a bit scifi-like.
So is it 'sin' or 'synthetic'?
It's an abbreviation of something, so I'll give you a point. [thing]
Ah, synergy ...
Point! [thing]
[jubilant] Wahey, uh-huh!
It is indeed a porte-manteau of cybernetics and synergy.
Are government policies somewhere?
Ooh! Yes, here, a point. [thing]
Does anyone want to guess where in the world ...
AMERICA!
Which area?
[poor South American accent] The south.
Well, if I would say the ...
Whichever answer was good, that is the one I mean.
Yes Gary, take a point here. It is in South America. [thing]
Yes!
Chili.
No, I'm fine; I have a sweater on. (chili sounds like chilly, which means cold)
I have tried hard to pronounce it as 'chilly'. So you would not make that joke ...
Does not matter!
It happens anyway; just live with it.
To be honest, everything that did was pretentious to you.
Yes.
[chic accent] 'Chile'.
[chic accent] 'Chile', I think that's how you want it to be pronounced.
I think it is pronounced 'CHYLE'.
That is what Jimi Hendrix says.
That is what we do.
It is not 'Voodoo Chilli'. Or maybe that should be the case.
[chic accent] It is 'Voodoo Chilé'.
[chic accent] 'Voodoo Chilé'?
[chic accent] 'Voodoo Chilé'.
You already know that it's one of those sleeveless jackets.
But you become a zombie when you pull it.
A voodoo waistcoat!
I am so soft and warm and ... BRAIN!
Chile is at the bottom left in America right?
Indeed, right at the bottom.
Down in America!
At the bottom left in America. You navigate like me.
It's that long right?
Yes.
It is the long thin that goes all the way down on one side.
We've been to school.
When are we talking about, when do you expect ...
Lunch time!
Half 3!
We both went for the same, did not we?
It's like those bloopers of a baseball game, where you see two men running for the same ball ...
What decade ...
would you expect 'Project Cybersyn'?
If this was in the 80 years I am disappointed. Seventies?
You will be disappointed, because it was in the seventies. Here, a point Matt! [thing]
Do we make South American robots?
1971 to 1973.
Is that when they took over everything and killed everyone?
No…
South America at that time, that is a questionable joke to make ...
That is what the project ended; it was a military coup.
That destroyed the control room.
So, yes ... But (!)
It was a military [pigeon sound]
Military coup ... (coo is pigeon sound in english)
Pigeons are coming! Release the robots!
Sir, the robots are not ready yet. The pigeons pick them in a thousand pieces! Oh what a world ...
Sir, the robots ...
HIS pigeons ...
[dove sound] - Oh my god!
I can not take off my glasses; I have lenses.
[dove sound with robot sounds]
My God!
[robot buzz with pigeons roekoe]
[softly] I do not like this ...
What I am looking for in a robot pigeon are two things ...
1. Someone has to work very long to perfect the way of walking of pigeons ...
so that their heads go from front to back on their walking rhythm.
That's easy. You just do a new link on their neck and attach it to their foreheads.
That is a modern gyroscope that should try not to compensate for it.
And the other is, they will still make sure that it picks up cigarette butts.
Every pigeon on the square moves in a choir.
Aaah!
That would be scary.
Oh, now we have gone too far.
Laser eyes.
Yes of course. They can not hold on because they have wings!
It does not fly with his wings to fly. It would do that with rocket motors in its buttocks.
For those who now switch on, Project Cybersyn ... is not about robotic pigeons.
I can only see a whole Trafalgar Square full of pigeons ...
that just stop, spread their wings and take off all.
at the same time.
That is a beautiful ... Compared to when they all start staring at you, that is a wonderful idea.
Project Cybersyn, gentlemen.
Robot pigeons, was not it?
Robot pigeons with rocket motors in their buttocks. We have already confirmed this, Tom.
Chili.
The seventies ... At the beginning of the seventies.
Was it a public computer project?
Ooh!
Yes may have a point, but what do you mean by public?
A computer in a cafe for someone - for everyone to use.
No. Not quite.
One of the state-sponsored, productivity strives, will ensure that robots come into factories.
To make things more efficient
Yes, you keep doing this ... "Is it a government-sponsored productivity ... robot ... in that"
No no.
Sponsored by the state. You know what, you get a point from me. Productivity sponsored by the state [ding]. Because, as you know, socialist government back then.
What were they trying to do?
Getting everyone to count?
Want to learn computer knowledge?
Yes, but that is too early. That's the seventies.
Way too early
Then everything was about improving productivity in the workplace ...
because that is where all the robot factories ended up and things.
So it has to do with transport and transport and the movement of goods and so?
Yes! Here you have a point [thing]
Databases is not it?
And you also have a point [thing]
It was an attempt to plan the economy of Chile ...
With the help of one large computer system.
And now! Since this has only worked for a short period ...
Can I assume that it was not a complete success?
And everybody burned it?
No, it did have a bit of success.
Has it declared people 'No longer essential'?
No, they got it, to search for errors in the code.
The screen flashes 'you are better off with coup'.
I do not know anything about politics here. I do not even know if it is appropriate.
"We turned it on and everything the screen says is" Death! "
All state factories of the state were given a computer terminal.
where they introduced all details about what happened.
And that was fed back to ...?
The office of the president.
The mainframe.
A guy with small glasses and a slide rule.
Matt is closer [thing].
America!
No, it was a central control room in Chile.
Complete with, what?
Coffee machine?
Toilets?
There was a lot ...
If this were the seventies, a strike!
I'll tell you something; you get a point [thing].
It helped deal with striking employees.
By killing them?
No. By …
No.
"Computer, what is our solution?"
"There is only 'Death' again."
"What I also impress!"
Striking truck drivers blocked access to the capital.
But they were able to find the free routes ...
and which factories still had employees who could send things out. And they used that central computer for that.
Oh, did it have Google Maps?
Not really then, right?
No, Bing!
Oh my God!
"Ah, I see you want to visit ... the middle of the Atlantic."
"Here is a picture of France."
Thanks Bing!
Bing would be so much better if it was recorded by Bing Crosby.
"So, I see you want to know more about York in England?"
"Well, there you go."
Except that it is Bing, so you get a map of the New York subway network.
"But, why would you want to go somewhere else?"
"Ah, sir, that's all you need to know about York ... uh ... you're not here."
"played well, boys."
What did the Central Planning Bureau have for the seven people who were sitting around ...
Chairs?
Super cool, reclining consoles with lots of screens and ...
I give you a point [thing]. They had…
These are the seventies, swirling tape and lights, right?
Sure!
Here we go. 1970, Star Trek-style console chairs in science fiction style.
for the seven people who collected all this information and made the decisions.
A sign on the toilet with 'Captain's Log' on it.
Aww ...
What was fine, apart from the guys in the very short dresses.
Oh yeah!
- I'm thinking of Star Trek uniforms here. - Yes.
The early Next Generation Star Trek had gender neutral uniforms.
that were basically short dresses, to about ...
I believe they were called 'skants'.
Skants. Yes.
That sounds like a crisp snack.
Skant!
- Skants! - New Skants!
You open the bag; there is not much in it.
Buy them today ...
BECAUSE THE COMPUTER HAPPENS YOU!
Buy them, or the pigeons will come after you!
You know, in history there are a number of people with big dreams about socialist planning and computers.
that have never been fulfilled.
The dream of this man did become reality.
William Shatner!
He just wanted a real Enterprise.
From which country did Stafford Beer come from?
America!
No.
The United Kingdom!
Yes that's right! [thing].
A British management cybernetics consultant.
- Potverdorie! - What? In the seventies ...
- In 1970. - You can not be that anymore now, do you?
Stafford Beer.
For that you have to be a startup now.
He also sympathized with the Chilean socialists.
And that worked pretty well!
I can imagine that!
He actually got - I do not know if it was a phone call at the time - but he suddenly got a message.
- Probably a telex. - A telex, right?
From the COM-PU-TER!
Of the beautifully named Fernando Flores and he actually left all his other work and said:
"Yes, I'm going to Chile!"
Someone has to pick up the [work] later. Otherwise it is everywhere on the floor!
And help the socialists.
Did they have a five-year plan?
Well, yes, but it took about two years.
I just wanted to say, did not it work well?
That is the duration of most five-year plans, in my experience, yes.
Let me guess, they were already pumping him very quickly.
No, they got a military coup.
Got?! ♫ There is a birthday hurray ...
♫ Here is a coup ... ♫
♫ You have five minutes to leave
♫ And your family too! ♫
I mean Chris, you pressed the button, but it was completely right.
Those cookies are for Gary. Well done.
Yes, the Chilean coup of 1973.
Are not those little things that you have at parties?
That is ... That is ... Crudités (French cut vegetables)!
A coup of crudités!
Oh look, it has the shape of a small gun!
How avant-garde!
Ooh! It has taken over my intestines!
Yes, that caviar was somewhat suspicious.
Does the fridge open ... Flags ... Parade ...
Tins of sardines that go around like nuclear missiles.
Then, a few years later, people wear red t-shirts with crudités!
Large images of a can of sardines ...
Are being held. They are clearly modified with a spray gun to make them look a bit newer.
Yes!
Those with the smoked salmon are at the top ...
for although all people are born equal, some are more equal than others.
Apart from a very old one in the middle; it looks as if it could fall off at any time.
With a great mustache!
It is a Chilean coup, so with a big hat and sunglasses.
Who was behind the Chilean coup? In 1973?
That was the COM-PU-TER!
It must have been the United States.
It must have been the United States. The government of Richard Nixon. Yes. [thing]
There is a name that you might recognize, someone who came to power after it.
- Pinochet! - Pinochet! [thing]
Damn! I had it right. Oh yeah.
It was the coup in which Pinochet came to power.
And ... As you know ...
As part of that, the enormous infrastructure of socialism against which Nixon and the US fought.
The enormous computer-organized whole ... Destroyed.
It must be said, in less than ...
Ooh how how!
It was not my intention that that would really hit.
-- Hey! - Handbags in the morning, ladies!
He is right, that was really worth mentioning.
That's the most 'close that door' slap I've ever seen, Tom.
That is true.
It is worth mentioning that they had an advanced prototype ready in less than two years.
What kind of central government operation; I do not know if the UK could do that ...
with a single project. Late is a big national project.
So they went completely startup?
Yes. They…
They had a great idea. They had a burn-out after two years. Almost literally.
That is it. That's all I'm going to say.
Yes, they succeeded.
And nobody received money at the end. And the person who thought up the idea ...
despite the fact that it was technically a failure, continued with a successful career in other fields.
And now nobody has heard of it!
Practically a start-up in the technology industry. See there!
The end of the nineties, recorded.
Yes!
So, congratulations. At the end, I think Gary ...
you are clearly the winner this time.
You win a restaurant that cooks lingerie over a box of hot coals that once belonged to a well-known civil engineer ...
Continue…
It is Brunel's Brassieres and Braziers Brasserie.
So congratulations, enjoy it.
And then we say hello to Chris Joel ...
Against Gary Brannan ...
And Matt Gray ...
This was Tom Scott and we'll see you next time.
Translations: Jeroen Uilhoorn Stephen Swatman Daniel Voogsgerd